Readme for Static Linkage Checker (#214)
GoogleCloudPlatform/cloud-opensource-java: dependencies/README.md

Static Linkage Checker
======================

Static Linkage Checker identifies the
[linkage conflicts](../library-best-practices/glossary.md#types-of-conflicts-and-compatibility)
that would be caused by 3rd-party dependencies of Java projects at runtime. The tool scans
the class files for references to other classes, and verifies the availability of the implementation

> through the classpath of the dependencies.

Author: How about this?

Given a classpath provided from
user (e.g., a Maven project and its dependency), the tool scans the class files in the classpath
for references to other classes, and verifies the availability of the implementation through
the classpath.

> through the classpath of the dependencies.

Reviewer: That sounds good.

### Use Cases

There are three use cases for Static Linkage Checker:

> -  **For organizations** that provide multiple libraries (through BOM) developed by different teams,

Author: That is true. Removed the mention of BOM.

>   the tool helps to ensure that there is no static linkage conflicts among the libraries and their

Author: Updated.

  dependencies when some of them are used at the same time.

> - **For library developers**, the tool ensures that the users of the library will not suffer the

Author: Fixed

  static linkage conflicts caused solely by the dependencies of the library.

> - (future plan) **For application developers** consuming 3rd-party libraries, the tool will

Author: Removed "3rd-party".

I placed "future plan" to indicate this use case is out of scope of 2018 Q4 target.

  assess the risk of static linkage conflicts among the application's dependencies, and will help

>   to use appropriate versions of libraries to avoid runtime errors.

Author: Updated.

### Approach

1. Given an input, the tool prepares a _linkage classpath_, from which the tool inspects Java
  classes.

2. The tool extracts all _references_ from the class files in the classpath.

3. The tool checks the linkage compatibility of the references through the classpath.
  
4. The tool traverses a _class usage graph_ to annotate the linkage errors with _reachability_.

> 5. At the end, the tool outputs the report on linkage errors.

Author: Fixed

> ### Output

Reviewer 2: I agree. I think we need to separate the definitions from specific tooling. If they don't sync up, at least one, possibly both, is somewhat incorrect.

> ### Output

Author: Let me try to update them, and add to existing glossary.md.

> ### Output

Author: The terms have been moved to glossary.md.

- **Static Linkage Errors** are reported by the tool. A static linkage error is either
  a _dangling reference_ or a _static linkage conflict_.

>   A _dangling reference_ is a reference where its destination class does not exist in the 

Author: "Unsatisfied" sounds to include the case where type signature/accessor mismatch.

  linkage classpath. This error happens when a class is removed in a different version of a library
  , or there is a dependency missed when constructing the linkage classpath.
  
  A _static linkage conflict_ is described in [glossary.md](../library-best-practices/glossary.md).
  In short, this error happens when the destination class's implementation is not compatible from
  what it was available at the time of compilation of the source class, in a way that such 

>   incompatibility causes `NoSuchFieldException`, `MethodNotFoundException`, or `LinkageError` when

Author: Yes, this document defines "static linkage error". I didn't find the term in "library-best-practices/glossary.md" though.

>  The messy part is that the tool can't really distinguish between the two causes of missing classes

That's right. I feel it's unnatural to call something missing as conflict. Let's continue discussion on this.

>   incompatibility causes `NoSuchFieldException`, `MethodNotFoundException`, or `LinkageError` when

Reviewer: Sorry, I should have said it is redefining a static linkage *conflict*. 

I think "conflict" is still fine as a term in the context of two libraries wanting two versions of the same dependency, one of which is missing a class. They are "in conflict" about what the right answer is.

  Java Virtual Machine tries to use the implementation.

### Class Usage Graph and Reachability

> - **Linkage Classpath** is a list of jar files from which the tool inspects Java classes when

Author: The term "linkage classpath" is introduced to distinguish the classpath of the tool (StaticLinkageChecker) itself and the classpath of the subject.

So without the mention of the tool, it's just a "classpath". I'd like to hear more from you.

> - **Linkage Classpath** is a list of jar files from which the tool inspects Java classes when

Reviewer: A couple things to say:

- After thinking about the term more carefully, I don't know that "linkage classpath" has very much sense to it.
- If you want to talk about the classpath that the tool is analyzing (to distinguish from the tool's classpath), I feel like "input classpath" or "subject classpath" would be clearer. The definition would be pretty simple: "A classpath analyzed by a tool, in contrast to the classpath of the tool itself." It doesn't need to reference Static Linkage Checker at all - this term could be used by other tools, and thus is appropriate for the glossary.
- There might also be value in having a term for a type of classpath that includes `provided` + `optional` dependencies, which doesn't need to make any mention of tools. Maybe "effective classpath" or "rendered classpath" or something else might work?

  running the tool against a project. A linkage classpath corresponds to the transitive dependencies
  induced by the direct dependencies in the target project's pom.xml file. This includes the
  dependencies marked as `provided` or `optional: true`.

- **Class Usage Graph**

  In order to provide better diagnosis on the output report, the tool builds _class usage
  graphs_. The nodes (vertex) of the graph correspond to Java classes and the directed edges are
  references between classes. For example, when 'Class A' has reference to 'Class B' on calling
  a method X, the tool builds a graph holding an edge between two nodes:

    [Class A] --(method X of class B)-> [Class B]

  In this case, 'Class A' is called the _source class_ of the reference and 'Class B' is called
  the _destination class_.

- **A reference** between two classes is either _class reference_, _method reference_
  or _field reference_.

>   A _method reference_ indicates the source class uses the (static or non-static) method of

Author: Updated

  the destination class.

>   A _field reference_ indicates the source class accesses the (static or non-static) field of

Author: Updated

  the destination class.

>   A _class reference_ indicates the source class uses the destination class without specific field 

Author: Updated

  or method (e.g., inheritance).

>   A reference is called _linkage conflicting_ when there is a linkage conflict

Reviewer: "linkage conflicting" feels grammatically odd to me.

Author: How about "A reference is called to have a linkage conflict" ?

Reviewer: In that case, the sentence would become self-referential, and might as well be removed.

>   (see [glossary.md](../library-best-practices/glossary.md#types-of-conflicts-and-compatibility)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  (see [glossary.md](../library-best-practices/glossary.md#types-of-conflicts-and-compatibility) )
```

  caused by the reference.
  When the destination class does not exist in the linkage classpath, the reference is called

>   _dangling reference_. When a reference does not have linkage error, then the reference is 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  a _dangling reference_. When a reference does not have a linkage error, then the reference is 
```

  called _linkage compatible_,

- **Reachability** is the attribute of static linkage errors to indicate whether a linkage
  error caused by a reference is _reachable_ from the _entry point classes_ of the class usage

>   graph; in other words, when a static linkage error is _reachable_, there exists a path of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  graph. In other words, when a static linkage error is _reachable_, there exists a path of
```

  references in the graph from one of entry point classes to the reference causing linkage
  error.
  The path helps to diagnose why static linkage errors are introduced to the dependencies.

> - **Entry Point Classes** are classes in the class usage graph and used to verify the reachability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Entry Point Classes** are classes in the class usage graph that are used to verify the reachability
```

  of static linkage errors. Users of the tool have choices on the scope of entry point classes:

>   - **Classes in the target project**: when the scope of entry point is only the classes in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Classes in the target project**: when the scope of the entry point is only the classes in the
```

>     target project, it ensures the current functionality used in the dependencies will not cause

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    target project, it ensures that the current functionality used in the dependencies will not cause
```

    static linkage errors.
    The output may fail to report potential static linkage errors, which would be introduced
    by starting to use a new class in one of the dependencies.

  - **Direct dependencies of the target project**: when the scope of entry point is the all classes
    in direct dependencies of the target project, it ensures that functionality of the dependencies

>     will not cause static linkage errors. The output may contain linkage error for unused classes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    will not cause static linkage errors. The output may contain linkage errors for unused classes
```

Static Linkage Checker
======================

> Static Linkage Checker is a tool that inspects classpaths for [static linkage check](

Reviewer: "Static Linkage Checker is a tool performs a [static linkage check](...) on a classpath."

../library-best-practices/glossary.md#static-linkage-check).

> The tool identifies static linkage errors that appear in Java projects at runtime.

Reviewer: This makes it sound like the Static Linkage Checker executes the code. I feel like the information in this sentence is already implied by "static linkage check" and can be removed. Maybe you can add the following to the prior sentence: "... and reports static linkage errors to the console."

dependencies at runtime. Given a classpath provided from

> user (e.g., a Maven project and its dependency), it scans the class files in the classpath

Author: Updated.

> in the referenced classes, with regard to their type signatures and accessors.

Reviewer: I feel like this last sentence is repeating information from "static linkage check." I think it might be more relevant to mention entry point classes and reachability here (since "static linkage check" doesn't imply those).

> for references to other classes, and verifies the availability of the implementation through

Author: Updated.

### Use Cases

There are three use cases for Static Linkage Checker:

-  **For organizations** that provide multiple libraries developed by different teams,
  the tool helps to ensure that there are no static linkage conflicts among the libraries and their

>   dependencies when some of them are used at the same time.

Reviewer: Remove "when some of them are used at the same time." - this is implied by "among the libraries and their dependencies".

> - **For library developers**, the tool ensures that the users of the library will not suffer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **For library developers**, the tool ensures that users of the library will not suffer
```

  static linkage conflicts caused solely by the dependencies of the library.

> - (future plan) **For application developers** consuming libraries, the tool will

Reviewer: > I placed "future plan" to indicate this use case is out of scope of 2018 Q4 target.

Honestly, completion of any part of the tool is out of scope of 2018 Q4 target.

As for usage by library developers and application developers, I feel like there is really no difference. We either support both or neither.

I feel like "future plan" makes use for calling out future functionality; it doesn't seem like tool documentation is a good place talk about future support for different classes of users.

  assess the risk of static linkage conflicts among the application's dependencies, and will help
  to avoid incompatible versions of libraries.

### Approach

1. Given an input, the tool prepares a _linkage classpath_, from which the tool inspects Java
  classes.
  Note that the linkage classpath is different from the runtime classpath of the tool itself.

2. The tool extracts all _references_ from the all class files in the classpath.

3. The tool checks the linkage compatibility of the references through the classpath, and records
  static linkage conflicts.
  
4. The tool traverses a _class usage graph_ to annotate the linkage errors with _reachability_.

5. At the end, the tool outputs a report on the linkage errors.

### Output

The tool reports zero or more static linkage errors for the linkage classpath, annotated
with _reachability_.

### Class Usage Graph and Reachability

> In order to provide diagnosis on the output report, the tool builds _class usage graphs_,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to provide a diagnosis on the output report, the tool builds _class usage graphs_,
```

and annotates linkage errors with _reachability_ from _entry point classes_.
The tool allows users to choose the scope of entry point classes:

  - **Classes in the target project**: when the scope of the entry point is only the classes in the
    target project, it ensures that the current functionality used in the dependencies will not
    cause static linkage errors.
    The output may fail to report potential static linkage errors, which would be introduced

>     by starting to use a new class in one of the dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    by starting to use a previously unreachable class in one of the dependencies.
```

  - **Direct dependencies of the target project**: when the scope of the entry point is the all

>     classes in direct dependencies of the target project, it ensures that functionality of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    classes in the direct dependencies of the target project, it ensures that the functionality of the
```

    dependencies will not cause static linkage errors. The output may contain linkage errors for

>     unused classes from user's perspective.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    unreachable classes from user's perspective.
```

> Static Linkage Checker

Reviewer 3: Is this the best name for the tool? Should it be something more like CheckStaticLinks? check_static_links?

Author: For me, a noun (_static linkage checker_) sounds suitable than verb+objective (_check_static_link_).

Yet, something we can hold affection would be nice. For example _Maven_ is better name than  _Java Dependecy Management Tool_ (hypothetical name).
Now "_Saltlake_" just came up to my mind as the name of the tool. (Static Linkage Checker -> SLC -> Saltlake City -> Saltlake)

Talk to you tomorrow.

> Static Linkage Checker

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Static Linkage Checker
```

> ======================

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Author: Updated.

Static Linkage Checker is a tool that finds [static linkage errors](
../library-best-practices/glossary.md) on a classpath and reports the errors to the console.

> It scans the class files in a classpath provided as input for references

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It scans the class files in a classpath for references
```

to other classes.

> It then verifies each of the references to find linkage errors in the classpath.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and reports any references that cannot be found in the classpath.
```

> The tool also provides analysis on reachability to the errors from entry point

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It can report all such missing references or only those that are reachable from a given set of entry points.
```

classes through class usage graphs.

### Use Cases

There are two use cases for Static Linkage Checker:

-  **For organizations** that provide multiple libraries developed by different teams,

>   the tool helps to ensure that there are no static linkage errors among the libraries and their

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  the tool helps to ensure that users depending on the libraries will not see any linkage errors at runtime
```

  dependencies.

> - **For library/application developers** the tool finds static linkage

Reviewer 3: I would put this one first. The other one is secondary; it's there only to make it less likely that a user using this tool will find errors that the library developer should have caught.

  errors in their projects, and will help to avoid incompatible versions of libraries
  in their dependencies.

### Approach

> 1. Given an input, the tool prepares a _linkage classpath_, from which the tool inspects Java

Reviewer 3: I would say that the required input is a class path. What do you think of this?

1.  The user specifies a class path on which to operate. This is separate from the class path of the tool itself.
2.  The tool lists all _static references_ from classes in the class path that cannot be found in the class path or in the JDK.
3.  Optionally, the user can specify a subset of the class path as "entry points"; in that case the tool will list only those missing references that are _reachable_ from the classes in the entry points.

I think the entry point subset should be specifiable as either a class path or a set of classes, but that's separate.

Author: I incorporated the enhancements. Do they look good now?

2. The tool extracts all _references_ from the all class files in the classpath.

3. The tool checks the linkage compatibility of the references through the classpath, and records
  static linkage errors.
  
4. The tool traverses a _class usage graph_ to annotate the linkage errors with _reachability_.

5. At the end, the tool outputs a report on the linkage errors.

### Output

The tool reports static linkage errors for the input linkage classpath, annotated
with _reachability_. Each of the static linkage errors contains the information on the
source class and the destination class of the reference, and has one of the three types:

  - _Missing class type_: a class reference causes a static missing class error.

  - _Missing method type_: a method reference has a static linkage conflict.

  - _Missing field type_: a field reference has a static linkage conflict.
     
### Class Usage Graph and Reachability

In order to provide a diagnosis on the output report, the tool builds _class usage graphs_,
and annotates linkage errors with _reachability_ from _entry point classes_.
The tool allows users to choose the scope of entry point classes:

>   - **Classes in the target project**: when the scope of the entry point is only the classes in the

Reviewer 3: Is the input to this tool a project definition like a pom.xml file? I think it should not be. I think instead this tool should operate on pure class paths. That way we can write a Maven plugin that uses the tool, or a Gradle one, or a Bazel one.

Author: Added following in approach:

> The tool takes a classpath as required input, through either a list of jar and
  class files in filesystems, a list of Maven coordinates, or a Maven BOM.
  A Maven BOM is converted to a list of Maven coordinates, and a list of Maven
  coordinates is resolved to a list of jar files that consists of the artifacts
  and their dependencies.

It can report all such missing references or only those that are reachable from
a given set of entry point classes.

### Use Cases

There are two use cases for Static Linkage Checker:

- **For library/application developers** the tool finds static linkage
  errors in their projects, and will help to avoid incompatible versions of libraries
  in their dependencies.

-  **For organizations** that provide multiple libraries developed by different teams,
  the tool helps to ensure that users depending on the libraries will not see any
  static linkage errors at runtime.

### Approach

1. The tool takes a classpath as required input, through either a list of jar and
  class files in filesystems, a list of Maven coordinates, or a Maven BOM.
  A Maven BOM is converted to a list of Maven coordinates, and a list of Maven
  coordinates is resolved to a list of jar files that consists of the artifacts
  and their dependencies.
  The classpath is called as _linkage classpath_ on which the tool operates
  to find linkage errors and is separated from the runtime classpath of the tool itself.

2. The tool extracts all _references_ from the all class files in the classpath.

> 3. The tool records references cannot be satisfied in the classpath as

Author: Fixed
